+++
title = "Russian"
author = ["James"]
tags = ["language"]
draft = false
+++

## The New Penguin Russian Course {#the-new-penguin-russian-course}


### 2. Russian Handwriting: More on Pronunciation {#2-dot-russian-handwriting-more-on-pronunciation}


#### 2.2 Word stress {#2-dot-2-word-stress}

Just like in English, the stress of words can influence the pronunciation of words and must be memorized.

When a letter is stressed, it will be written with a \`. The following letters change in 'pronunciation':

| letter | not stressed | stressed |
|--------|--------------|----------|
| о      | [а]          | [о]      |


#### 2.5/2.6 Softness and hardness of consonants {#2-dot-5-2-dot-6-softness-and-hardness-of-consonants}

**Soft**
: means that the consonant is pronounced with a simultaneous **y** sound

**Hard**
: means pronounced like English consonants

Examples:

| Soft  | word                              |
|-------|-----------------------------------|
| день  | [\\(\text{dyen}^{y}\\)]           |
| совéт | [\\(\text{s-a-v}^y\text{-é-t}\\)] |

<!--list-separator-->

-  When are consonants soft?

    -   A consonant becomes **soft** if it is followed by one of the following:

        |   |   |   |   |   |   |
        |---|---|---|---|---|---|
        | е | ё | и | ю | я | ь |

    -   **ч щ** are always _soft_
    -   **ж ц ш** are always _hard_

    `fun fact: ты знаешь is written with a soft sign, but this does not make ш soft - it is only there for historical reasons`


#### 2.8 Voiced consonants can become unvoiced {#2-dot-8-voiced-consonants-can-become-unvoiced}

At the end of a word, these consonants become unvoiced.

| voiced consonant | turns into unvoiced |
|------------------|---------------------|
| б                | п                   |
| в                | ф                   |
| г                | к                   |
| д                | т                   |
| ж                | ш                   |
| з                | с                   |

They also become unvoiced if they stand before an unvoiced consonant, such as:

|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| к | п | с | т | ф | х | ц | ч | ш | щ |


#### 2.9 Unvoiced consonants can become voiced {#2-dot-9-unvoiced-consonants-can-become-voiced}

Similarly, unvoiced consonants become voiced before the consonants б г д ж з (but not в).


### 3. Everyday Phrases: Basic Grammar {#3-dot-everyday-phrases-basic-grammar}


#### Gender {#gender}

Masculine nouns
: normally end with a _consonant_ or _й_

Feminine nouns
: normally end _-а_ or _-я_

Neuter
: end with _-o_ or _-e_

Special cases

-   Words ending with a soft sign (ь) are feminine, but there are many masculine ones too, so these have to be studied.
-   Foreign words denoting females are always feminine


### 4. Doing Things - Verbs; Personal Pronouns {#4-dot-doing-things-verbs-personal-pronouns}

type 1
: знать
    stem = infinitive - ть

type 2
: говорить
    stem = говор

type 1B
: ехать
    same endings usually as type 1, but stem is usually different
    differences in -я usually

    я знаю
    я еду


#### Verbs and stress {#verbs-and-stress}

When stressed at the end, ye become yo. Several rules:

1.  If the word contains ë, stress always falls there.
2.  If the infinitive of a verb is stresed on any syllable except the last one, the stress is fixed.
3.  If the infinitive is stressed on the last syllable, the ya form is stressed on the ending. The other five forms will either all have the stress on the ending or on the stem.


#### Prepositional case {#prepositional-case}

After в and на, most masculine nouns add -е and most feminine nouns change their last -а or -я to -е.


### 5. Asking Questions; the Prepositional Case {#5-dot-asking-questions-the-prepositional-case}

-   же is used to add emphasis in a question, for ex. `где же она?` - where _is_ she?


## Grammar cases {#grammar-cases}


### Prepositional case {#prepositional-case}
